You'd go talk to him, particularly for his
numbers. He always had this old, humongous
1,000-key calculator, I guess. I don't know. And
he would sit there. Well, it was on this side
because he was left-handed. And he'd run some
numbers, and he'd crunch numbers on that thing,
and it would hum and whir and clank and everything,
and he'd have the answer for you. But no, Clark was a
delight to work with. In fact, Really all the
directors that I worked with were, we were, we had a
really good group. And a smooth relationship.
Yeah, a smooth relationship. And also between
Diebel and Cherry. Yeah, oh yeah, yeah, yeah. Now
where was Howard Vestal at that time? Howard
Vestal was, then he was director of auxiliary
enterprises. Oh, okay. You know, like the housing
operations in the airport and So that in those
years, you didn't report through him? No, no. In
fact,
Tom Cherry had no assistants or anything like
that. He had five or six directors, I guess,
because he had Clark Diebel and Wes Donaldson
purchasing, Ray Smith, myself, Logan Council,
and Clark Diebel. I don't think I missed anybody.
All right, as you first, you took over then for Bob
Rucker. Yes. When was that? That was in, I believe
September of, either September or early October
of 73. 73. All right, describe then the campus for
which you were responsible, what were its
dimensions, and what were the good and bad points
that you had to deal with in terms of realities and
who were the key people that you had then reporting
to you? Okay. In 1973 the basic
dimensions of our what we call our public areas
that we maintained were really within the bounds
of Texas Avenue, Jersey then, Welbon Road, and
University Drive, with exception to the Hensel
Park area where we were. We had some maintenance
there. We had a little bit of maintenance over west
of the tracks. We had an old creamery building
which stood right in the middle of the now entrance
to the west campus, the vet school building, the
entomology field lab, and I believe that was all.
Yeah, that was all. One of the biggest problems I
had was there had never been any real coordination
between our activities and facilities planning
construction and you know I'd come out and there's
somebody would be tearing something up and I'd go
find out hey what what how when where this kind of
thing so finally General Ludeke who was the
facilities planning area reported to him he was a
vice president he said and Bob had gone to a few of
them but he said you know He said, I think I need you
sitting in on my weekly staff meetings on Friday
morning, just for coordination. And that was
great. Sitting in on what? On Ludicrous, our
Ludicrous staff meetings, where I think Joe Adams
was director of facilities planning, and I think
Paul Stevens, Paul Stevens and Charles Brunt were
the other two, one construction, the other one for
the design area. And that got me talking to them on a
regular basis, you know, and developing some
rapport and all like that. And finally we got to a
point where I was being involved or we were being
involved in all the design reviews and all like
this so we could provide input. And it got to a point
that they didn't do anything without me checking
with us and all like this but what before that what
had happened is that the average working person
for grounds average gardener or groundskeeper
they would do something and then sit get torn up
beyond their control and also with physical we had
some problems with physical plant that i had to
work through and uh then before long they would see
we could do something and it didn't get torn up, you
know, and there began kind of an evolution of
change as far as attitudes. And we were able to get
some positions reclassified and where we could
move some people up a little bit more according to
their abilities. But I had a staff of
Bill Vitapil had then come over as full-time. I
talked to Mr. Cherry about it. And I think probably
in early 1974, he came over as full-time assistant
director. And then B.C. Hurt was my lead
supervisor. He was over all the new construction,
irrigation, and kind of special projects. Frank
Salpatro we hired as, Frank was maybe a foreman or
something in the grounds, and he was over all the
landscape maintenance, all the mowing, the
routine day-to-day housekeeping kind of
operations. And then Albert Engelman, he was over
in facilities planning. And he, um, came over as a
supervisor of our roads and pavement section. And
that's something that I had to learn a lot about
because I'd never dealt with, with asphalt or
paving or anything like that in my prior
experience. Uh, then in, um, I guess it was all also
in, in early. very early 74, that Tom says, you
know, you need a number two person. And Bill
wasn't, Bill Vitipa wasn't too interested in
that. He was handling the greenhouse operation,
the annual color, and all the setups for special
events, commencement, and, you know, that kind of
thing. And so I said, okay. And I started looking,
and then ultimately found Mike Goldwater. And
Mike came to work. Probably in March or April of 74.
He was in the park system at Arlington, Texas, and
had a degree from Texas Tech. It's one of those
things that I had two leading candidates for that.
Both had the same degree, had the same amount of
experience, and either one could have done the
job, and I guess that's when the good Lord looks
after you, you know, and you make the right choice,
because Mike was one of these guys that has
knowledge about a little bit of everything. And we
meshed very nicely. He had a lot of capabilities
that I didn't have and I had some that he didn't
have. And we got to a point in our working
relationship where we would meet the hallway
going to each other's office with the same thing
you know I mean it was it was kind of crazy at times
but without him we couldn't have done a lot of what
we did because he had the knack of handling a lot of
things like that you know And once we got that set
up, we had a very good organization. We started
doing some training. And by then, I was very
familiar with budgets and all like this. And we had
just
the state grounds farm that came in I guess about
1974 probably and that that helped too because
that basically helped us set aside a dedicated
amount strictly for our grounds and that let us
start budgeting for a lot of capital capital
outlay equipment equipment and small projects
and this kind of thing that above and beyond what
the new facilities would would provide then also
in the in the summer of 74 is when when we started all
the preparation for the centennial celebration
and a firm landscape architectural firm by the
name of Mark Newman Dahlberg they did a quote
master plan landscape master plan and
then ultimately out of that came six or seven major
landscape projects and five street projects or
six street projects and we went through probably
two years of we had a major landscape project on the
two dormitory areas north and south dorm we had a
perimeter entrances project which was the north
gate wall which that created lots of
consternation particularly among the merchants
and you could You could read through some of their
rhetoric. And they were afraid that we were trying
to keep the kids on our side and that the wall was
going to have glass embedded in the top and all like
that. And I guess a couple of years after the wall
was up, I knew we'd made some headway when I had some
kids from the University MYF group at this church.
And we were driving back towards the church, and
someone said, you know, that wall doesn't look
half bad. And I thought, boy, we've made some
headway there, you know. But those projects and
then a number of street projects, and all that was
happening at the same time. And the campus was just
some of the, we had a student draftsman at the time,
and He kept referring to it as DMZ, you know,
because of all the fences and all like that. And in
addition to that, we had a number of building
projects, had a water line project, you know, and
the campus was just torn from A to Z. What was your
evaluation of the master plan which this company
provided? I had some question marks about it. You
know, I mean, it had some good parts.
They didn't understand some things about A&M, you
know.
As an example, in the North Durham area, they
created a lot of berms and things like this that I
said, no, we don't need those out there, because
that's where the kids have got to get out and burn
off the energy. And if it's not reasonably usable,
they said, well, they can lay out on the sun. I said,
they need to get out and throw a ball around and that
kind of stuff. But I lost that one. Some of the
others we won. The perimeter and entrances,
fortunately, these projects were farmed out to
other landscape architects. Gene Shrickel,
Shrickel and Rollins had what we call the North
Plaza Mall, which is all the chemistry fountain
and all like that. He and his group were a champ to
work with, as well as Hal Stringer, out of Waco who
did the perimeter and entrances, and that was two
phases. One was the wall along University Drive
and then the entrance developments at Eastgate
and Westgate and South LaSalle. And we would go to a
design review both with the North Plaza Mall and
perimeter and entrances. And then they'd come by
the office and we'd get some things worked out on
what would really work, you know, and they were
very workable, you know, it, uh, and I think those,
those projects turned out, turned out very well.
Not that the others didn't, but those probably
were because particularly the perimeter and
entrances, it gave a definition to the campus and
said, okay, here we are. And we always tried to,
from, 1973 or four on is to develop a sense that when
a visitor came on campus they got a very positive
impression because that's the only time you ever
get to make that first impression and it's got to be
positive. And then later, I think in the 80s, and
you may remember this, I think the Carnegie
Institute came out with a study in maybe the
mid-80s, early 80s, that 65 or 70 percent of the
entering freshmen choose a school based on
appearance, you know. And that came out and it kind
of, I guess, gratified my thoughts about what we
were trying to do is providing the that good first
impression, as well as a good exterior
environment, because as Bob and I always talked
and tried to do, is a lot of the youngsters coming to
school, maybe from inner city and this kind of
thing, they've never had an opportunity to see a
lot of open space and green and this kind of thing.
Did these outside firms spend enough time
learning about the campus before they started
doing their designs? I think a few of them did. I'm
not so sure Mark Newman Dahlberg did. And that's
kind of part of the, I know there for a while,
landscape architect was a dirty word. I mean, very
seriously, it was a dirty word. I just said, hey,
you know, I'm Director Grounds. But, no, I think
particularly Strickland Rollins and Hal
Stringer. They spent an inordinate amount of time
compared to some of the others.
Like all the streets and roads contracts, that was
pretty cut and dried. We were either replacing,
and I know we got to a real problem when they started
on replacing the the existing some of these
existing streets on Ross Street because of all the
street trees and without the street trees we
wouldn't have near the campus that we have today
and what we had to do when that that it started down
about the architecture building and went west.
And the facilities planning inspector, his name
is George Reisler, he called me and he said, I think
we've got a problem. And went up there and the,
they'd done some demolition on the street,
removed the curbs, and the live oaks, they had just
a proliferation of roots right behind the curbs.
So we got our heads together to decide what what was
the best avenue to do? We almost knew that we
couldn't go in and cut the root. To put it back
exactly where it was, you'd have to cut about 12
inches of the roots off. That would very seriously
damage the trees.
And you can still see it a little bit on Ross Street
where the curb goes in, and the streets were
narrowed a foot on each side. And I think that, plus
a lot of the preliminary work that we did in the
trees, the pruning and thinning, And I think we
probably lost two or three trees out of all those
street projects, which I think I'm very proud of
that. All right, so they were sensitive on that
issue. Give some examples in the 70s where the
outside designers listened to y'all and heeded
some advice. And then if you remember any examples
of where they didn't take your advice. Hmm. I'm
trying to think where they didn't. Most of the time
they did. Okay. We had it, and I can't remember any
specifics, but I know early on it took a while. We
couldn't get our comments heard, I think. One was
protection trees and construction areas. And
finally I found out how to do it. I got it in the Red
Book. And so Mike and I set up and we did a lot of
sketches and drawings on preferred and needed
tree protection. They'd come in and slap some
two-by-fours around the trunk and call it
protected. And when we were saying you need to go
out to the dripland, there's some instances where
that was the only protection that could be
afforded. But once we got that in the Red Book, then
we would say, refer to Red Book page, whatever,
whatever. And they say, can't we vary it? No, you
can't. And then we'd have a contractor that would
damage a tree, maybe inadvertently or whatever.
And we had a method of determining damage by the
National Arboriculture. It was an international
shade tree conference formula. And we could put a
pretty good cost figure on that tree based on the
kind of tree it was, where it was, the condition of
it, and this kind of thing. And we've collected on
it. And Paul Stevens would say on many occasions,
and Paul and I used to argue at length on a number of
different things, but he'd say, you better
protect those trees or this man will build you real
quick.
Looking back from the vantage point of the
present, Should we have varied our tree
collection at that point? Yeah, I think so. Did
anybody suggest it then? No, and it wasn't until We
started looking at some of that in the mid-80s, I
guess, and started doing some, well, maybe the
early 80s. We started doing a lot of, for the first
number of years, best of all, we planted live oaks.
And then we got to talking to some of the pathology
folks and this kind of thing. And then that's when
we started bringing a lot of other trees. We were
trying to keep the live oaks primarily as a street
tree to make the aesthetic tie between the main
campus and west campus. So that there's a lot of
continuity there. But then we started adding a
number of other tree species. And I think that
helped. And that became more and more evident of
the need. And we did that as a... you know, as the
years went on. Describe, in general, this whole
problem of the live oak decline or whatever it's
called. Well, there's two problems with live oaks
and oaks. First is live oak decline. Live oak
decline is a fairly slow acting disease and it
normally attacks a live oak when it has been
wounded or and the best correlation I can make to
that is like a person that is weakened and they get
pneumonia. It's something very similar. And it's
a fairly slow acting and it's basically a fungal
disease that clocks up the water uptake system of
the tree, very simply. And we lost some trees to
that, but where we protected them and worked with
them, we found that we could keep up the health and
that wasn't quite the problem. that the oak wilt
is. Oak wilt's a different cat. It's a fairly fast
acting tree and it will affect the red oaks and the
live oaks. It affects a broader spectrum of trees.
The live oak decline will also spread by root
grounds but the oak decline, or oak wilt I mean, it
spreads by by root grafts and by an insect vector.
Well, the client will spread by an insect vector
too because it's a fungus, but the oak wilt is much
more easily moved It's more contagious, I guess
you might say. Why do we appear to have it more on the
campus than all throughout the community? I don't
know. It may have some play that the trees are a
little weaker because of compaction, building,
sidewalks, that kind of thing. And there's any
number of things that can add up. to those kind of
problems. But we've got, what, 43 or so thousand
people using the campus. And that creates a
problem. And I've assumed that as we put in new
sidewalks, wider walkways, deeper curbs,
gutters, and streets, somebody spills some water
or they wash out a truck or something or other, all
of that Mm-hmm. Yeah, we used to try to designate,
even going back to the street projects, we had
designated places where the concrete trucks
could wash out so they could be cleaned up, this
kind of thing. And I think that helped. We had, I
think, a good inspector that he and I got along very
good. We had a good rapport. And he understood the
need for that.
But given where we're located as an institution
and a community, what are the special realities
that a landscaper has to cope with on that campus?
Oh, we've got a problem with soil and water. Um,
the, um, I think the general soil type is called,
um, a Lufkin fine sand. It's, it's a very,
Compactable material and It if it gets wet and gets
any kind of compaction on it's it's the dickens to
relieve Makes it very difficult for tree roots
particularly to grow. The other thing is our
water. It's Has a lot of a lot of sodium and
bicarbonates particularly sodium and And that
just compounds the compaction problem, because
what you do, you tend to increase your pH, go more to
the alkaline side, and that tends to what we call
deflocculate the soil, which takes out all the air
spaces, basically, is what it does. And that
creates another problem. And that's the reason
why we'll go into a drought period like we have now,
And then we'll start getting some real frog
stranglers, hopefully. And that tends to leach
out not all the sodium, but a lot of the sodium in the
bicarbonates and gets it out of the root zone. And
you start seeing things green up. And that's one of
the reasons. I mean, we can keep it alive. with the
with our water but ultimately if you had we had the
water totally and we didn't get any rainfall we'd
start seeing a lot of degeneration of almost all
kinds of vegetation because the just water our
soil our water has in it now uh relatively good
drainage very good drainage is needed um are there
some other trees that in hindsight we might have
added that would have been a blessing been a
positive to the oak? Well, we have two or three
elms. The cedar elm, which is a native tree, is a
very good tree. A little leaf elm or an evergreen
elm. depending on where you are and what part of the
country you're from, is a good one. The Chinese
pistachio tree I think is an excellent tree. It's
one of the few trees that makes a good fairly fast
growing tree and has fall color here, which we
desperately need. The ball cypress is a good tree.
It takes a little establishment But we used a
number of those in like the chemistry mall central
campus area. And those things are up now probably
25, 30 feet tall and have done very well. But they
make a good upland tree. Once you get them
established, you've got to really, really water
them for two or three years. Because if they ever
brown, being a conifer, they're the odds of them
coming back are very poor. But they do make a good
upland tree once you get them established.
In that centennial year,
were you aware of Dr. Williams' health decline? I
think I had heard some rumors, you know, that he was
not feeling well, but I didn't see him all that
much. I mean, I'll tell you, we were so busy back in
those days that I went went to Tom Cherry's staff
meetings and any plan reviews and General
Ludeke's meeting, and that's about all I did,
unless there was some specific request, because
we were just trying to keep our heads above water,
you know, to keep the campus maintained with
everything being so disrupted. And Dr. Williams
going to the hospital and being there a good while
didn't have any effect on General Ludeke. took
over as the interim during that time. Was there any
change from your? Never saw anything. The
only thing we had a change after Tom Cherry
retired, and I reported to Clyde Freeman for a
year. That was different. We seemed to get along
OK. But he was a lot more demanding than Tom Cherry
about specifics, on justifications. Instead of a
two or three word paragraph, I had to write two or
three paragraphs, that kind of thing. And I never
will forget, Tom Cherry came by to visit me one day
after he retired. And I was needing a large motor
grader. because we had two of them at the time. And
the larger one had just completely worn out. And I
said, you know, I'm having to write a thesis on the
justification. They said, I told you you should
have bought the damn thing when I was here. But
other than that, we didn't have that much problem,
really. And then reported to Freeman for about how
long? For about a year. And then who? And then
Howard Vestal. became the VP. Howard took over
after Mr. Cherry. Describe him and his management
style. Howard was a different type of manager.
We got along very good. We had a very good working
relationship.
Um, it's kind of hard to peg the real difference,
but he was, had a little more casual, uh, mode about
him. And I would go up to him, you know, I'd have an
idea about something and go up to him and it's, Hey,
that's what I'm hiring you for. Do it, you know? And
that's kind of the way we operated. I always had,
um, Anytime I need to see him, I could get in and see
him, as well as Mr. Cherry. I could call up and say, I
need to talk. And they'd say, come on up.